  Friday, May 17, 2002

  An Online Course Teaches Students to Use Libraries and the
  Internet -- and Avoid Plagiarism

  By BROCK READ
  
  "Most of the time, students plagiarize unintentionally," says
  Kimberley B. Kelley, associate provost of information and
  library services at the University of Maryland University
  College. And most unintentional plagiarism, according to Ms. Kelley,
  comes from the Internet -- to which students turn for research without
  understanding how to cite the material they find. "Everybody's using
  [the Internet], so let's be realistic about it," she says.
  
  Ms. Kelley is attempting to reduce unintentional plagiarism at
  her college with "Information Literacy and Research Methods,"
  an online course she developed. The course -- introduced at
  the beginning of this semester -- is now required of all
  students working toward degrees at the college, which
  specializes in courses for adults and part-time students.
  
  Avoiding plagiarism is one of several topics explored in the
  one-credit, seven-week course. Students learn strategies for
  forming and researching theses, using electronic resources
  like Internet sites and e-books, citing documents, and
  searching for information at libraries. "Is it a panacea? No
  way. But I think it helps students to understand plagiarism
  and research," says Ms. Kelley.
  
  "Information Literacy and Research Methods" has a Web site
  that makes extensive use of animation to explain key concepts.
  In a discussion of Internet URL's, for example, each section
  of a URL appears with a description of what it signifies.
  "Students love the animation," according to Ms. Kelley. "The
  more eye candy, the better."
  
  During the course, students create "research logs" in which
  they choose a topic, develop a thesis, and properly cite
  Internet resources and books they would use in a paper. They
  also complete a final exam and weekly exercises that ask them
  to use online search engines and library catalogs.
  
  On discussion boards, students and faculty members converse
  about issues facing researchers and librarians. Ms. Kelley
  says that the boards have spurred considerable debate on what
  constitutes plagiarism and whether libraries should use
  Internet filtering software to block objectionable Web sites.
  
  More than 1,800 students have already enrolled in the course,
  which will be taught five times a year in several sections of
  100 students. The sections are led by librarian or researcher
  from a number of different universities; Ms. Kelley oversees
  all the courses and maintains a Web site offering advice to
  the faculty on teaching techniques.
  
  This month, the Maryland Distance Learning Association named
  the course the state's best distance-education offering for
  the past academic year, and Ms. Kelley says she's also
  received positive comments from many of the students who
  enroll. "I thought students would be upset at having to take
  an extra course, but by the end of the course they're usually
  thanking me," she says.
  

